CLDR-15034 kbd: transform DTD changes (#2762)
unicode-org/cldr: docs/ldml/tr35-keyboards.md

Such implementations must take care to remove all such markers (see prior section) from the resultant text. As well, implementations must take care to avoid conflicts if applications themselves are using PUA characters, such as is often done with not-yet-encoded scripts or characters.

* * *

### <a name="Element_transformGroup" href="#Element_transformGroup">Element: transformGroup</a>

> <small>
>
> Parents: [transforms](#Element_transforms)
>
> Children: [import](#Element_import), [reorder](#Element_reorder), [_special_](tr35.md#special), [transform](#Element_transform)
>
> Occurrence: optional, multiple
> </small>

A `transformGroup` represents a set of transform elements or reorder elements.

Each `transformGroup` is processed entirely before proceeding to the next one.

Each `transformGroup` element, after imports are processed, must have either [reorder](#Element_reorder) elements or [transform](#Element_transform) elements, but not both. The `<transformGroup>` element may not be empty.

**Examples**

#### Example: `transformGroup` with only `import` elements

> This is a `transformGroup` that consists only of [`import`](#element-import) elements.  With this form, only `transform` OR `reorder` elements may be imported by all import statements, but not both.

Reviewer: I'm still not seeing how this isn't just a special case of both of the other two `transformGroup` types.

Both of the other two state:
> This is a `transformGroup` that consists of one or more _____ elements, prefaced by one or more `import` elements. See the discussion of those elements for details.

(Fill in the blank with either `transform` or `reorder`.)

If the key point is that even without rules, only one type is supported... I think that'd be clearer if this example followed the other two entries, as they'd make the pattern clearer, I think.

See my related suggestions for the definition of the other two groups.  Hopefully that'll help to clarify my issue here.  Those should make the fact that _this_ group is basically a strict subset of the other two clearer.  (Yes, this one doesn't specify either a `transform` or a `reorder` element directly, but it does by proxy via `import`.)

Author: it's a leftover that should just be removed…

```xml
<transformGroup>
    <import path="..."/>
    <!-- other <import> elements -->
</transformGroup>
```

#### Example: `transformGroup` with `transform` elements

> This is a `transformGroup` that consists of one or more [`transform`](#element-transform) elements, prefaced by one or more `import` elements. See the discussion of those elements for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a `transformGroup` that consists of one or more [`transform`](#element-transform) elements, optionally prefaced by one or more `import` elements that import `transform` elements. See the discussion of those elements for details.

`import` elements in this group type may not import `reorder` elements.
```

```xml
<transformGroup>
    <import path="..."/> <!-- zero or more optional import elements-->
    <transform />
    <!-- other <transform/> elements -->
</transformGroup>
```

#### Example: `transformGroup` with `reorder` elements

> This is a `transformGroup` that consists of one or more [`reorder`](#element-reorder) elements, prefaced by one or more `import` elements. See the discussion of those elements for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a `transformGroup` that consists of one or more [`reorder`](#element-reorder) elements, optionally prefaced by one or more `import` elements that import `reorder` elements. See the discussion of those elements for details.

`import` elements in this group type may not import `transform` elements.
```

With this change and its corresponding change for `transformGroup` with `transform` elements, I don't see a reason for "`transformGroup` with only `import` elements" to exist, except _maybe_ as a footnote to these two.

Author: correct, it should just go

* * *

### Element: variables

> <small>
>
> Parents: [keyboard](#Element_keyboard)
>
> Children: [import](#Element_import), [_special_](tr35.md#special), [variable](#Element_variable)
>
> Occurrence: ?, ?
> </small>

* * *

> ### <a name="Element_variables" href="#Element_variables">Element: variables</a>

Reviewer: Why are there two separate versions of this header?  The first version is incredibly unclear in purpose, looking like a shell that led to the second one.

Author: typo ,fixed thanks

* * *

### <a name="Element_transformGroup" href="#Element_transformGroup">Element: transformGroup</a>

> <small>
>
> Parents: [transforms](#Element_transforms)
>
> Children: [import](#Element_import), [reorder](#Element_reorder), [_special_](tr35.md#special), [transform](#Element_transform)
>
> Occurrence: optional, multiple
> </small>

A `transformGroup` represents a set of transform elements or reorder elements.

Each `transformGroup` is processed entirely before proceeding to the next one.

**Examples**

Each `transformGroup` element must have **one** of the following three forms. It is not allowed to have an empty `<transformGroup>` element.

#### Form 1: `transformGroup`: import-only

This is a `transformGroup` that consists only of [`import`](#element-import) elements. No other elements are allowed, with the exception of [`special`](tr35.md#special). With this form, only `transform` OR `reorder` elements may be imported by all import statements, but not both.

```xml
<transformGroup>
    <import path="..."/>
    <!-- other <import> elements -->
</transformGroup>
```

#### Form 2: `transformGroup`: transform

> This is a `transformGroup` that consists of one or more [`transform`](#element-transform) elements, prefaced by one or more `import` elements. See the discussion of those elements for details.

Reviewer: I realize I probably missed the discussion day that led to this decision, but... we have an import-only version of transformGroup and others that also allow imports?

The wording for "import-only" groups says that "no other elements are allowed", but here for the 'transform' variant we have a transformGroup (the example below) that looks identical until a "non-allowed" element is found.  How do we plan to validate this?

What is gained by Form 1 that Form 2 doesn't get?  Otherwise... why would I not just target use of Form 2 and not care to learn about Form 1 whatsoever?  Form 1 appears to be a strict subset of Form 2 to me.

Author: I think the only thing we want to disallow is both `transform` AND `reorder`.

Originally, `import` was to be disallowed when used with `transform`, but I think it just makes it too complicated.  

I'll reword this. The DTD already says:

```xml
<!ELEMENT transformGroup ( import*, ( transform* | reorder* ), special* ) >
```

Author: See if this looks better now.

Reviewer: Better, but it's still unclear.  It sounds like the imports here would probably be affected by the same rule as in Group 1... but Group 2 still accepts multiples, so the whole "strict subset" thing still seems to be in effect.

The only thing clarified is the non-heterogenous import rule - which _is_ much clearer now, to be sure.  But... that's not what the original comment was addressing.

- **Nested non-capture groups**

    `(?:thismatches) (?:[abc]([def]))|(?:[ghi])`

    Only the innermost group is allowed to be a capture group.

- **Disjunctions**

    `abc|def`

    Match either `abc` or `def`.

- **Match a single Unicode codepoint**

    `.`

    Matches a codepoint, not individual code units. (See the ’u’ option in EcmaScript262 regex.)
    For example, Osage `𐒵` is one match (`.`) not two.
    Does not match [markers](#markers). (See `\m{.}` and `\m{marker}`, below.)

- **Match the start of the text context**

    `^`

    The start of the context could be the start of a line, a grid cell, or some other formatting boundary.
    See description at the top of [`transforms`](#element-transform).

#### Additional Features

The following are additions to standard Regex syntax.

- **Match a Marker**

    `\m{Some_Marker}`

    Matches the named marker.
    Also see [Markers](#markers).

- **Match a single marker**

    `\m{.}`

    Matches any single marker.
    Also see [Markers](#markers).

- **Variables**

    `${zwnj}`

>     In this usage, the variable with `id="Matras"` will be substituted in at this point in the expression. The variable can contain a range, a character, or any other portion of a pattern. If `zwnj` is a simple string, the pattern will match that string at this point.

Reviewer: Uh... variable with `id="zwnj"`?  I don't see where the "Matras" part fits in the example here.

Author: thanks, good catch

- **Set variables**

    `$[upper]`

    Given a space-separated variable, this syntax will match _any_ of the substrings. This expression may be thought of  (and implemented) as if it were a _non-capturing group_. It may, however, be enclosed within a capturing group.

    Given the variable `upper` defined below, the expression `$[upper]` will match as if it were written `(?:A|B|CC|D|E|FF)`. Note that leading, trailing, and excess whitespace are ignored.

    ```xml

>     <variable id="upper" value=" A B CC  D E  FF " />

Reviewer: Is there a reason for the extra spaces after certain entries?

```suggestion
    <variable id="upper" value=" A B CC D E FF " />
```

Author: yes, it shows that they can be aligned with the prior and succeeding lines (in this case 'upper' and 'lower' are a pair)

Reviewer: That certainly holds in a later example I saw during the review, but in isolation it felt like the extra spaces may have been implying something I wasn't inferring.  It's certainly clearer later on once the alignment example comes into play.

Author: Think this is now covered, reopen if not

Reviewer 2: LGTM

</variables>
```

These may be then used in multiple contexts:

```xml
<!-- as part of a regex -->
<transform from="${cluster_hi}X" to="X" />
<transform from="Y" to="${cluster_hi}" />
…
<!-- as part of a key bag  -->
<key id="hi_key" to="${cluster_hi}" />
<key id="acute_key" to="${acute}" />
…
<!-- Display ´ instead of the non-displayable marker -->
<display to="${acute}" display="´" />
```

* * *

### Element: set

> <small>
>
> Parents: [variables](#Element_variables)
>
> Children: _none_
>
> Occurrence: optional, multiple
> </small>

> This element represents a set of strings used by the [transform](#element-transform) elements for string matching and substitution.

_Attribute:_ `id` (required)

> Specifies the identifier (name) of this set.
> All ids must be unique across all types of variables.

_Attribute:_ `value` (required)

> The `value` attribute is always a set of strings separated by whitespace, even if there is only a single item in the set, such as `"A"`.
> Leading and trailing whitespace is ignored.
> This attribute may be escaped with `\u` notation, see [Escaping](#Escaping).

> > Sets may refer to other string variables if they have been previously defined, using `${string}` syntax, or to other previously-defined sets using `$[set]` syntax.

Reviewer 2: Suggest adding:

```suggestion
> Sets may refer to other string variables if they have been previously defined, using `${string}` syntax, or to other previously-defined sets using `$[set]` syntax.
> Set references must be separated by whitespace: `$[set1]$[set2]` is an error; instead use `$[set1] $[set2]`.
```

> [Markers](#markers) may be included with the `\m{…}` notation.

**Examples**

```xml
<variables>
    <set id="upper" value="A B CC D E FF " /> <!-- 6 items -->
    <set id="lower" value="a b c  d e  f " /> <!-- 6 items -->
    <set id="upper_or_lower" value="$[upper] $[lower]"  /> <!-- Concatenate two sets -->
    <set id="lower_or_upper" value="$[lower] $[upper]"  /> <!-- Concatenate two sets -->
    <set id="a" value="A"/> <!-- Just one element, an 'A'-->
    <set id="cluster_or_zwnj" value="${hi_cluster} ${zwnj}"/> <!-- 2 items: "हि \u${200C}"-->
</variables>
```

Match "X" followed by any uppercase letter:

```xml
<transform from="X$[upper]" to="…" />
```

Map from upper to lower:

```xml
<transform from="($[upper])" to="$[1:lower]" />
```

See [transform](#element-transform) for further details.

* * *

### Element: unicodeSet

> <small>
>
> Parents: [variables](#Element_variables)
>
> Children: _none_
>
> Occurrence: optional, multiple
> </small>

> > This element represents a set, using a subset of the [UnicodeSet](tr35.md#Unicode_Sets) format, used by the [transform](#element-transform) elements for string matching and substitution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> This element represents a set, using a subset of the [UnicodeSet](tr35.md#Unicode_Sets) format, used by the [`transform`](#element-transform) elements for string matching and substitution.
```

Not sure if we are doing this consistently, but it really helps to do so :grin:

> Note important restrictions on the syntax below.

_Attribute:_ `id` (required)

> Specifies the identifier (name) of this unicodeSet.
> All ids must be unique across all types of variables.

_Attribute:_ `value` (required)

> String value in [UnicodeSet](tr35.md#Unicode_Sets) format.
> Leading and trailing whitespace is ignored.
> Variables may refer to other string variables if they have been previously defined, using `${string}` syntax, or to other previously-defined UnicodeSets (not sets) using `$[unicodeSet]` syntax.

**Syntax Note**

> - Multi-character strings (`{}`) are not supported, such as `[żġħ{ie}{għ}]`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Warning: UnicodeSets look superficially similar to regex character classes as used in [`transform`](#element-transform) elements, but they are different. UnicodeSets must be defined with a `unicodeSet` element, and referenced with the `$[unicodeSet]` notation in transforms. UnicodeSets cannot be used directly in a transform.
- Multi-character strings (`{}`) are not supported, such as `[żġħ{ie}{għ}]`.
```

I'm not sure of the wording, but I can see keyboard devs tripping over on this (and it might be good to include similar wording under the transform element).

Author: or at least "see #element-unicodeSet" from there. Agreed. Also this is a good reason to NOT have UnicodeSet intermingled in the regex syntax.

- UnicodeSet property notation (`\p{…}` or `[:…:]`) may **NOT** be used, because that would make implementations dependent on a particular version of Unicode. However, implementations and tools may wish to pre-calculate the value of a particular UnicodeSet, and "freeze" it as explicit code points.  The example below of `$[KhmrMn]` matches all nonspacing marks in the `Khmr` script.

> - UnicodeSets may represent a very large number of codepoints. A limit may be set on how many unique range entries may be matched.

Reviewer 2: This is nice and vague :grin: ... might trip us over?

Author: yes, TODO to set a number

**Examples**

```xml

> <variables>
> <unicodeSet id="consonants" value="[कसतनमह]" /> <!-- unicode set range -->
> <unicodeSet id="range" value="[a-z D E F G \u200A]" /> <!-- a through z, plus a few others -->
> <unicodeSet id="newrange" value="[$[range]-[G]]" /> <!-- The above range, but not including G -->
> <unicodeSet id="KhmrMn" value="[[\u17B4\u17B5\u17B7-\u17BD\u17C6\u17C9-\u17D3\u17DD]"> <!--  [[:Khmr:][:Mn:]] as of Unicode 15.0-->
> </variables>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<variables>
  <unicodeSet id="consonants" value="[कसतनमह]" /> <!-- unicode set range -->
  <unicodeSet id="range" value="[a-z D E F G \u200A]" /> <!-- a through z, plus a few others - 
 ->
  <unicodeSet id="newrange" value="[$[range]-[G]]" /> <!-- The above range, but not including G -->
  <unicodeSet id="KhmrMn" value="[[\u17B4\u17B5\u17B7-\u17BD\u17C6\u17C9-\u17D3\u17DD]"> <!--  [[:Khmr:][:Mn:]] as of Unicode 15.0-->
</variables>
```

Reviewer: Line 1520, attribute `value`:  two opening `[`, but one closing `]`.

Author: I see it, thanks @jahorton

Author: fixed

```

> The `unicodeSet` element may not be used in mapping operations.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we need to say "may not be referenced by key and display elements"?
```suggestion
The `unicodeSet` element may not be referenced by [`key`](#element-key) and [`display`](#element-display) elements.
```

Author: It can't be used in those, either.   I think that should be separate.

Author: ```suggestion
The `unicodeSet` element may not be used as the source or target for mapping operations (`$[1:variable]` syntax), nor referenced by [`key`](#element-key) and [`display`](#element-display) elements.
```

```xml
<variables>
  <unicodeSet id="consonants" value="[कसतनमह]" /> <!-- unicode set range -->

>   <unicodeSet id="range" value="[a-z D E F G \u200A]" /> <!-- a through z, plus a few others -
>  ->

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <unicodeSet id="range" value="[a-z D E F G \u200A]" /> <!-- a through z, plus a few others -->
```

- **Fixed character classes and escapes**

>     `\s \S \t \r \n \f \v \\ \$ \d \w \D \W` … TODO: check these

Reviewer 2: Just flagging this TODO more prominently!

Author: ```suggestion
    `\s \S \t \r \n \f \v \\ \$ \d \w \D \W \0`
```

Reviewer 2: Hmm, do we need to allow `\0`? Potential for pain there... especially given most implementations are likely to be C-ish and not allow nul bytes in strings. I also can't see it being generally useful in a keyboard

    The value of these classes do not change with Unicode versions.

    `\s` for example is exactly `[\f\n\r\t\v\u00a0\u1680\u2000-\u200a\u2028\u2029\u202f\u205f\u3000\ufeff]`

    `\\` and `\$` evaluate to `\` and `$`, respectively.

- **Character classes**

>     `[abc]` `[^def]`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    `[abc]` `[^def]` `[a-z]`
```

Reviewer 2: Should say also that we could represent the other two examples just by deleting the whitespace in them
```suggestion
    `[abc]` `[^def]` `[a-z]` `[ॲऄ-आइ-ऋ]` `[\u093F-\u0944\u0962\u0963]`
```

    - supported

>     - no Unicode properties such as `\p{…}`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - no Unicode properties such as `\p{…}`
    - Warning: Character classes look superficially similar to UnicodeSets as defined in [`unicodeSet`](#element-unicodeSet) elements, but they are different. UnicodeSets must be defined with a `unicodeSet` element, and referenced with the `$[unicodeSet]` notation in transforms. UnicodeSets cannot be used directly in a transform.
```

    Tooling may choose to suggest an expansion of properties, such as `\p{Mn}` to all non spacing marks for a certain Unicode version.  As well, a set of variables could be constructed in an `import`-able file matching particularly useful Unicode properties.

    ```xml
    <unicodeSet id="Mn" value="[\u034F\u0591-\u05AF\u05BD\u05C4\u05C5\…]" /> <!-- 1,985 code points -->
    ```

- **Ranges**

>     To use a range, use a `<unicodeset>` or `<set>` variable.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is correct; we support character classes (which may contain ranges, e.g. `[a-z]`, and is afaik the only use of the term 'range' in regex?).

Author: - [ ] `<marquee>TODO</marquee>`

    **Example**

    ```xml
    <set id="upper" value="A B CC D E  FF       G" />

>     <set id="lower" value="a b c  d e  \u{0192} g " />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <set id="lower" value="a b c  d e  \u{0192} g" />
```

I know that whitespace at the end is ignored, but it's good if the example is clean...

    <!-- note that values may be spaced for ease of reading -->
    …
    <transform from="($[upper])" to="$[1:lower]" />
    ```

    - The capture group on the `from=` side **must** contain exactly one set variable.  `from="Q($[upper])X"` can be used (other context before or after the capture group), but `from="(Q$[upper])"` may not be used with a mapped variable and is flagged as an error.

    - The `from=` and `to=` sides of the pattern must both be using `set` variables. There is no way to insert a set literal on either side and avoid using a variable.

>     UnicodeSets may not be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    A UnicodeSet may not be used directly, but must be defined as a `unicodeSet` variable.
```

        <!-- subjoined consonant -->
        <transform from="\u1039[\u1000-\u101C\u101E\u1020\u1021\u1050\u1051\u105A-\u105D]" />

        <!-- tone mark -->
        <transform from="\u102B\u103A" />

        <!-- Handle prebases -->
        <!-- diacritics stored before e-vowel -->
        <transform from="[\u103A-\u103F\u105E-\u1060\u1082]\u1031" to="\u1031" />

        <!-- diacritics stored before medial r -->
        <transform from="[\u103A-\u103B\u105E-\u105F]\u103C" to="\u103C" />

        <!-- subjoined consonant before e-vowel -->
        <transform from="\u1039[\u1000-\u101C\u101E\u1020\u1021]\u1031" to="\u1031" />

        <!-- base consonant before e-vowel -->
        <transform from="[\u1000-\u102A\u103F-\u1049\u104E]\u1031" to="\uFDDF\u1031" />

        <!-- subjoined consonant before medial r -->
        <transform from="\u1039[\u1000-\u101C\u101E\u1020\u1021]\u103C" to="\u103C" />

        <!-- base consonant before medial r -->
        <transform from="[\u1000-\u102A\u103F-\u1049\u104E]\u103C" to="\uFDDF\u103C" />

        <!-- delete lone medial r or e-vowel -->
        <transform from="\uFDDF[\u1031\u103C]" />
    </transformGroup>
</transforms>
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If no specified transform among all `transformGroup`s under the `<transforms type="backspace">` element matches, a default will be used instead - an implied transform that simply deletes the most recent codepoint.
```

Or something similar, yet more accurate, in wording.  Just to be clear that keyboard authors don't have to directly handle the most simple & common cases.

The "implied transform", to my understanding, should match "standard"/common backspace behavior.  Or maybe it should be "a single character cluster"?  Either way, we want something that is simple and straightforward to understand and incorporate into a keyboard developer's mental model... and probably something that isn't reliant upon script-specific details.

----

Being explicit here may also be fairly important - I've seen certain platforms (iOS) auto-delete more than a single codepoint in certain cases.  For example, it may delete multiple codepoints when combining emoji are involved:

https://github.com/keymanapp/keyman/blob/05759dc95f0148edb6d47b00a3ff081536b06586/ios/engine/KMEI/KeymanEngine/Classes/Keyboard/InputViewController.swift#L341-L351

We don't want keyboard authors to have surprises in this regard, where one platform interprets the spec differently such that default backspace implementation differs per platform.

Other fun context regarding this:

https://github.com/keymanapp/keyman/pull/4427#issuecomment-777905602

In the comment linked above, iOS's default backspace (`.deleteBackward()`) behavior deleted _four_ codepoints in a single call!  To be clear, those four codepoints were a single Khmer character cluster - but that means the iOS default is to delete a _cluster_, not a _codepoint_.

It's possible that my assumption about the default being a single codepoint is wrong, and that it should be a character-cluster instead.  Either way, this is why I believe it needs explicit definition here - so that we don't leave vendors any "wiggle room" that would affect cross-platform behavior.

Reviewer: Possibly of note - it is my understanding that "character cluster" boundaries, internally, could be inferred from the "reorder" mechanism?  Not that this is likely to be seen as sufficiently "explicit and clear" enough to be relied upon by your average keyboard author.

The issue I see with relying on "character cluster" default backspacing, if that would otherwise be our answer - what defines a "cluster" for minority language keyboards - and in a manner that can be incorporated into a compiled LDML keyboard?  I suppose script-specific knowledge may suffice - but I believe that the only mechanism currently in the keyboards with access to such knowledge would be the reorder rules.

Reviewer: Per @mcdurdin - "deletes a single codepoint, unless it's an emoji cluster.  For emoji clusters, a backspace deletes one full combined-emoji cluster."

That's our take, anyway.

Author: Let's discuss in a few.

Author: I added a comment.  Does not address emoji yet but let's discuss.

Author: Think this is now covered, reopen if not

Reviewer 2: LGTM
